% Chapter 4: Conclusion and Future Work
\chapter{Conclusion and Future Work}

\section{Conclusion}
This thesis has made progress toward establishing a causal foundation for factor investing by applying modern causal inference techniques to both synthetic and real financial data. We created synthetic panel data with known causal structures and then carefully test several causal inference methods. This allowed us to validate each method's ability to recover true causal relationships among factors and returns. The key findings and contributions are:

\textbf{Methodological Validation}: Our synthetic data experiments confirmed that difference-in-differences (DiD) analysis effectively recovers treatment effects when there is confounding (momentum bias in treatment assignment). Optimal transport (OT) distributional DiD provided deeper insights into the full effect distribution, not just the mean effect. Matching methods, especially OT-based matching, improved covariate balance and produced more credible effect estimates when sufficient overlap exists between treatment and control groups.

\textbf{Causal Discovery Performance}: Pairwise causal discovery methods (ANM and DIVOT) showed mixed results. For simple, static relationships in our synthetic data, they could identify which factors truly cause returns versus spurious correlations. However, real financial data proved far more complex, with both methods returning largely inconclusive results, highlighting the dynamic and non-linear nature of actual market relationships.

\textbf{Real Data Insights}: Application to Fama-French factor data revealed that while specific market events (dot-com bubble, financial crisis) provide clear natural experiments for causal identification through DiD, general factor causality is difficult to establish algorithmically. We documented significant regime-dependent effects, with factor relationships changing dramatically across market conditions.

\textbf{Instrumental Variables Challenges}: Our IV analysis demonstrated the difficulty of finding valid instruments in financial markets. While conceptually appealing, instruments that initially seem reasonable often fail key validity tests, leading to unrealistic estimates that highlight the challenges of IV in financial applications.

To put the findings in context: our synthetic "market" showed that out of four factors, only three were real return drivers. If this exercise were done on actual market data, the implication is that many of the documented factors in the literature might turn out to be non-causal. This aligns with concerns raised by researchers like \textbf{López de Prado} \cite{Lopez23} about the rapid growth of factors without solid foundation. By keeping a causal focus, factor investing research can shift from seeking predictive patterns to identifying relationships that are stable and structural. For investors, this suggests that portfolios built on causal factors may be more resilient, as they are grounded in underlying economic mechanisms rather than correlations. Our real data analysis reinforces this view: the failure of causal discovery methods to find clear relationships in the general case, combined with successful identification during specific events, suggests that true causal factors may only reveal themselves under certain market conditions.

\section{Future Work}
While our thesis offers a complete proof-of-concept, it also opens several avenues for further research and development:

\textbf{Dynamic Causal Models}: Future work could extend our static factor models to dynamic settings where factor values evolve over time and mutual causality between factors becomes important. Vector autoregression (VAR) models combined with causal discovery could address questions like: "Do value and momentum factors influence each other over time?"

\textbf{Regime-Dependent Analysis}: Our real data analysis revealed significant time-variation in factor effects. Developing methods that can automatically detect regime changes and estimate causal relationships within each regime would be valuable for practitioners. Traditional methods assume constant effects, but this assumption is clearly violated in practice.

\textbf{High-Dimensional Causal Discovery}: As the "factor zoo" continues to grow, with researchers proposing hundreds of potential factors, causal discovery methods face the challenge of high-dimensional data and multiple testing. Combining ML with careful causal frameworks can handle large-scale problems (imagine using thousands of stocks and dozens of factors). However, care is needed to maintain interpretability and avoid overfitting spurious causal relationships. Future research could therefore focus on \textbf{"causal machine learning" for finance}, aligning with emerging fields like meta-learning for causal inference or invariant-prediction methods.

\textbf{Practical Implementation}: Moving from academic proof-of-concept to practical investment strategies requires addressing additional challenges: transaction costs, portfolio constraints, and the dynamic nature of markets. Future research might explore how causally-validated factors can be combined into robust portfolios that maintain their effectiveness out-of-sample.

In conclusion, this thesis demonstrates that causal inference can provide valuable insights for factor investing, particularly when applied thoughtfully to specific contexts (natural experiments) rather than as a general-purpose algorithmic approach. The combination of OT methods with traditional econometric techniques shows promise, but the complexity of real financial markets means that domain expertise and careful identification strategies remain essential. The path forward lies in combining the computational power of modern causal discovery with the theoretical rigor of econometric identification, tailored to the unique challenges of financial markets.